[doc] Add NGram tech blog (#6311)
NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM: docs/source/blogs/tech_blog/blog_7_NGram_performance_Analysis_And_Auto_Enablement.md

# N-Gram Speculative Decoding in TensorRT‑LLM
N-Gram speculative decoding leverages the natural repetition in many LLM workloads. It splits previously seen text into configurable (key, value) n‑gram pairs and, during generation, swiftly proposes draft tokens by matching the current key against n-gram pools in memory.

> In this blog, we introduce TensorRT‑LLM’s new N-Gram speculative decoding algorithm, highlight its performance gains, and explain the auto‑enablement heuristic that activates it when it delivers the most benefit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog, we introduce design choices in TensorRT‑LLM’s N-Gram speculative decoding algorithm, share our experimental results of performance gains, and explain NGram's low barrier to adoption by deriving a simple heuristic to enable it.
```

## Highlights
* **Fast & lightweight.** N‑Gram algorithm runs on the host with low overhead.
* **Real speed‑ups at low concurrency.** N-Gram achieves accepted length of 1.37 and more on average running on the Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered dataset ([link](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered/viewer/default/train)) with the first round of conversation. Results in 10-60% E2E runtime speed-up.
* **Works even better with multi-turn conversations.** With the cache built up during the first round of conversation, the second round achieved a higher accepted length of 1.66 and a 30–90 % E2E runtime speed-up.
* **Excels on tasks with natural repetition like translation.** With the translation dataset, the accepted length can exceed 4.0. New requests can benefit from cache generated by previous requests with similar tasks and reduce latency by up to 70%.
* **Heuristic “just works”.** Set `spec_decode_algo=AUTO` to enable N‑Gram by default when `concurrency ≤ 32`; with the following heuristic

>   * Batch size 1‑4: N-Gram configuration with `k=3, v=5`.

Reviewer: Would avoid putting the details of the heuristic here. The heuristic will change in the future, and having the exact BS conditions in the blog is not needed to explain the algorithmic idea. It just creates the potential for confusion down the road.

Author: Removed the detailed policy.

  * Batch size 5‑32: N-Gram configuration with `k=5, v=3`.
  * Batch size > 32: disable N-Gram.
  * This policy adds ≈15% overhead to iteration latency yet still nets double‑digit end‑to‑end speed‑ups.

---

## Table of Contents
- [Background & Motivation](#background--motivation)
- [Algorithm & Complexity](#algorithm--complexity)
- [Performance Study](#experimental-setup)
    - [Experimental Setup](#experimental-setup)
    - [Case 1 with Conversation Dataset ](#case-1-with-conversation-dataset)
        - [Speed-up for the First Turn](#speed-up-for-the-first-turn)
        - [Effect of Multi-turn conversation](#effect-of-multi-turn-conversation)
    - [Case 2 with Translation Dataset](#case-2-with-translation-dataset)
        - [Warm‑Cache Experiments](#warmcache-experiments)
- [Auto‑Enablement with Heuristic](#autoenablement-with-heuristic)
- [Feature Gaps & Future Work](#featuregaps--future-work)

---

## Background & Motivation

> Speculative decoding drafts several tokens, verifies them on the model, and keeps the accepted prefix. An N‑Gram proposer can generate drafts without extra model computation for draft models, making it low-cost for low‑latency serving. Average accepted length (AL) is ~1.3 in generic chat (MT‑Bench, Magpie with the first round of conversation) and can exceed 4.0 on highly repetitive data like the translation workload.

Author: Adopted.

| k  | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 5    | 5    | 5    | 5    |
| v  | 7    | 7    | 9    | 9    | 11   | 11   | 13   | 13   | 15   | 15   | 17   | 19   | 21   | 23   |
| AL | 3.44 | 3.62 | 3.708| 3.925| 3.878| 4.092| 4.079| 4.214| 4.198| 4.36 | 4.43 | 4.55 | 4.59 | 4.73 |

Figure 7 shows properties of accepted tokens among the drafts with N-Gram configured with k = 5, v = 7. Note that `accepted tokens = accepted length (AL) - 1` as it does not include the one good token from verification.

From the pie chart on the left, among the seven draft tokens proposed by N-Gram, roughly one-third of the cases accept none of the drafts, while another one-third accept all of them. Compared with the similar pie chart in Case 1 Figure 4, the ratio is very high. The graph on the right plots the accepted tokens among the drafts at each iteration with five random requests.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_accepted_token_case2.png" width="auto" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 7. Accepted Tokens from Drafts</em></sub></p>

> ####  Warm‑Cache Experiments

Reviewer: I would leave off this section. I think the study we have done is very useful internally, but for external sharing, it has some shortcomings:
1. Warming the cache with the same dataset from which we extract the test set is a bit suspect.
2. Saying that using a random dataset to warm the cache is unhelpful is a bit obvious and doesn't add value to the user.
Intuitively, we'd expect something like "by carefully selecting a warmup dataset, you can improve the AR of your test set", but right now, we don't have the data for it. This is totally fine, and we can leave it as future work.

If you want to say something about Warm cache, you can say something like "Given the clear improvement in AL between first and second turns of a multi-turn dataset, it would be interesting to explore the effects of warming cache with a carefully chosen dataset. Our experiments on this are ongoing."

Comparing the accepted length (AL) between the cold cache and the warm cache initialized with Magpie, we see little improvement from the warm cache. Note that warm cache increases the size of the cache pool and thus the lookup overhead. The gain does not outweigh the overhead and therefore does not provide a benefit.

When comparing the accepted length (AL) between the cold cache and the warm cache built with the translation dataset, the improvement is significant! The warm cache from other requests running similar tasks benefits new requests. The natural repetition in context and language can deliver around a 77 % latency speed-up.

**In conclusion, the benefit of warm cache highly depends on context similarity.**

---

##  Auto‑Enablement with Heuristic

> To take advantage of the strong performance of the N-Gram speculative decoding algorithm, we propose a simple batch-aware policy that keeps iteration overhead under control and yields ~15 % end-to-end speed-up at low to mid concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A big part of NGram's appeal is the simplicity of deployment. It does not need a carefully selected draft model or additional training of model heads to benefit from speculative decoding. It can be enabled by the serving software to take advantage of the strong performance of the N-Gram speculative decoding algorithm.
From our experiments, we propose a simple batch-aware policy that keeps iteration overhead under control and yields ~15 % end-to-end speed-up at low to mid concurrency.
```

Author: Adopted.

  * Batch size 1‑4: N-Gram configuration with `k=3, v=5`.
  * Batch size 5‑32: N-Gram configuration with `k=5, v=3`.
  * Batch size > 32: disable N-Gram.

> How to enable the heuristic?

Reviewer: Would delete everything below this to keep the blog focused on algorithmic aspects that are not tied to TRT-LLM implementation.

Author: Removed this section as well as the Feature Gap which is tied to implementation.

## Highlights
* **Fast & lightweight.** N‑Gram algorithm runs on the host with low overhead.
* **Real speed‑ups at low concurrency.** N-Gram achieves accepted length of 1.37 and more on average running on the Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered dataset ([link](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered/viewer/default/train)) with the first round of conversation. Results in 10-60% E2E runtime speed-up.
* **Works even better with multi-turn conversations.** With the cache built up during the first round of conversation, the second round achieved a higher accepted length of 1.66 and a 30–90 % E2E runtime speed-up.
* **Excels on tasks with natural repetition like translation.** With the translation dataset, the accepted length can exceed 4.0. New requests can benefit from cache generated by previous requests with similar tasks and reduce latency by up to 70%.
* **Heuristic “just works”.** Set `spec_decode_algo=AUTO` to enable N‑Gram by default when `concurrency ≤ 32`; with the following heuristic

>   * Batch 1‑4: N-Gram configuration with `k=3, v=5`.

Author: Good point. Updated.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_init_sequence_scan.png" width="auto" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 1. Request initial scan</em></sub></p>

* **Per‑token update** ‑ slide window and update cache pool

    We now have a new token in the sequence. Figure 2 shows how the cache pool is updated accordingly. For existing key-value pairs whose value length is less than the `max_draft_len`, the new token can be appended. The new token can be the value to new keys as well, which are marked as new pairs in the graph.

    The number of cache update and addition is approximately the product of `max_draft_len` and `max_matching_ngram_size`, which is a constant for fixed parameters.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_per_token_update.png" width="auto" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 2. Per-token update</em></sub></p>

* **Lookup** ‑ construct the last k tokens as the key and propose draft tokens as its value.

    If `is_public_pool= True`, a global pool is shared by all the requests. If `is_public_pool= False`, each request will have its own cache pool.

>     The lookup time is logarithmic in the number of keys in the cache pool.

Author: Good catch, updated.

In this experiment, we used Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered dataset ([link](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Magpie-Align/Magpie-Llama-3.1-Pro-MT-300K-Filtered/viewer/default/train)) which is a conversational dataset with two turns. The user question on the second turn is related to the previous question and answer.

The first turn only data represents a general conversation with no context. The repetition comes from the conversational structure and correlation between the question and answers.

On the second turn, the global cache already has the knowledge of the previous conversation. The additional repetitions comes from the correlation between the second answer and previous conversation.

#### Speed-up for the First Turn
For batch size of 1, 4 and 32, we config the max_batch_size of the model accordingly. We will run `20 * batch_size` number of requests with the model and compare the E2E runtime with and without N-Gram speculative decoding.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_speed_up_first_turn.png" width="80%" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 3. First Turn Speed-up</em></sub></p>

> 

Author: I prefer to separate them since first-turn is the "general" case the heuristic is based on. Second turn is a special case with multi-round conservations.

We can see that N-Gram can provide speed-ups for batch sizes up to 32 and works best with a single batch. The main overhead with larger batch sizes is the verification cost. With batch size being 1 and 4, `k = 3, v = 5` is the best N-Gram configuration. With batch size = 32, `k = 5, v = 3` is the best configuration since the verification batch size is smaller and the overhead is less.

#### Effect of Multi-turn conversation
The table below shows the accepted length (AL) derived from 3000 sampled conversations using different N-Gram configurations.
| k | v | AL Turn1 | AL Turn2 |
|---|---|-------|-------|
| 3 | 5 | 1.37 | 1.66 |
| 5 | 5 | 1.40 | 1.77 |
| 5 | 3 | 1.37 | 1.66 |

Among the proposed draft tokens, Figure 4 shows the distribution of accepted draft token length with `k=3, v=5`. Note that `Accepted‑length (AL) = accepted draft token length + 1`.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_magpie_accepted_token_distribution.png" width="80%" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 4. Accepted draft token length distribution</em></sub></p>

> 

Reviewer: I actually have a different opinion here :)
I think the pie chart is a nicer way to show the breakdown of AL across requests, and the large number of iterations where nothing gets accepted is informative.
The one suggestion I have on it is to report the AL rather than the number of accepted drafts, so it is not 0-based, but 1-based.

> 

Author: I prefer the pie chart as well. Updated the numbers to match AL.

In Figure 5, for each iteration, we plot the average of accepted length (AL) for each request. Transparency is calculated according to the number of requests scheduled on that iteration and normalized by the max capacity among all iterations. If fewer requests are scheduled, the dot is more transparent.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_al_over_iteration_magpie.png" width="auto" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 5. AL over iteration</em></sub></p>

Figure 6 shows the speed-up with N-Gram speculative decoding for the second turn of conversation only.
Ngram with `k = 3, v = 5` delivers 96.13% of speed-up with single batch and 63.99% of speed-up with batch size 4. With batch size 32 and NGram `k = 5, v = 3`, the speed up is 33.06%.
<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_speed_up_second_turn.png" width="80%" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 6. Second Turn Speed-up</em></sub></p>

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest to merge this part to `tech_blog7_speed_up_first_turn.png` part.

Author: Prefer to keep them seperate.

| k  | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 3    | 5    | 5    | 5    | 5    | 5    |
| v  | 7    | 7    | 9    | 9    | 11   | 11   | 13   | 13   | 15   | 15   | 17   | 19   | 21   | 23   |
| AL | 3.44 | 3.62 | 3.708| 3.925| 3.878| 4.092| 4.079| 4.214| 4.198| 4.36 | 4.43 | 4.55 | 4.59 | 4.73 |

Figure 7 shows properties of accepted tokens among the drafts with N-Gram configured with k = 5, v = 7. Note that `accepted tokens = accepted length (AL) - 1` as it does not include the one good token from verification.

From the pie chart on the left, among the seven draft tokens proposed by N-Gram, roughly one-third of the cases accept none of the drafts, while another one-third accept all of them. Compared with the similar pie chart in Case 1 Figure 4, the ratio is very high. The graph on the right plots the accepted tokens among the drafts at each iteration with five random requests.

<div align="center">
  <figure>
    <img src="../media/tech_blog7_accepted_token_case2.png" width="auto" height="auto">
  </figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 7. Accepted Tokens from Drafts</em></sub></p>

> 

Reviewer 2: The color of the dots in the legend is partly transparent?

Comparing the accepted length (AL) between the cold cache and the warm cache initialized with Magpie, we see little improvement from the warm cache. Note that warm cache increases the size of the cache pool and thus the lookup overhead. The gain does not outweigh the overhead and therefore does not provide a benefit.

When comparing the accepted length (AL) between the cold cache and the warm cache built with the translation dataset, the improvement is significant! The warm cache from other requests running similar tasks benefits new requests. The natural repetition in context and language can deliver around a 77 % latency speed-up.

**In conclusion, the benefit of warm cache highly depends on context similarity.**

---

##  Auto‑Enablement with Heuristic
To take advantage of the strong performance of the N-Gram speculative decoding algorithm, we propose a simple batch-aware policy that keeps iteration overhead under control and yields ~15 % end-to-end speed-up at low to mid concurrency.

  * Batch 1‑4: N-Gram configuration with `k=3, v=5`.
  * Batch 5‑32: N-Gram configuration with `k=5, v=3`.
  * Batch > 32: disable N-Gram.

> 

Reviewer 2: Use `batch_size` rather than `Batch`?

How to enable the heuristic?

Example with quickstart_advanced.py
```python
python3 quickstart_advanced.py --model_dir $MODEL_DIR \
    --spec_decode_algo AUTO
```

Example with LLM speculative_config parameter
```python
LLM(model = ...,
    backend='pytorch',
    speculative_config = AutoDecodingConfig(),
    ...)
```
---

## Feature Gaps & Future Work
There are known feature gaps we will resolve in the future:
* N-Gram is not compatible with overlap scheduler.   `disable_overlap_scheduler=True` is required to enable N-Gram speculative decoding.

> * The drafter will always pad the draft token length to `max_draft_len` even if the meaningful draft length is smaller. This forced padding behavior adds wasteful computation in verification.

Reviewer 2: Do we mention somewhere that `--disable_kv_cache_reuse` is also used implicitly during speculative decoding?

> * The drafter will always pad the draft token length to `max_draft_len` even if the meaningful draft length is smaller. This forced padding behavior adds wasteful computation in verification.

Author: KK, removed the "future work" part.
